<!DOCTYPE html>
<html lang="en" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta charset="utf-8" />
<title>Asynchronous shells</title>
<link rel="home" href="../../"/> 
<link rel="copyright" href="../../copyright"/> 
<link rel="openid.delegate" href="http://openid.m.aier.us/will" />
<link rel="openid.server" href="http://www.myopenid.com/server" /> 
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="../../css/site.css" />
<link rel="updates alternate" type="application/atom+xml" href="https://github.com/wcmaier/wcmaier.github.com/commits/master.atom"/> 
<!--[if IE]>
<script src="http://html5shiv.googlecode.com/svn/trunk/html5.js"></script>
<![endif]-->
</head>
<body>

<article>

<header>
<hgroup>
<h1>Asynchronous shells</h1>
</hgroup>
<nav>
<ul>
<li><strong><a href="../../">wcmaier</a></strong></li>
</ul>
</nav>

</header>

<section>
<p>
Waiting for compiles and other verbose, long-running processes to complete is tedious, and tedium irritates the programmer's soul.
Among my several <a href="../simple-sync-netcat">tricks</a> for coordinating processes with minimal forethought, I rely most often on the simplest trick of all.
</p>

<p>
Long ago, I <a href="https://github.com/wcmaier/dotfiles/commit/4e9ccdefd0770fce9035a6ff0dca90065a67b312">added a bell</a> to my ZSH prompt.
Each time <code>PS1</code> was evaluated by the shell, it would ring the bell, effectively notifying me whenever some task had completed.
At the time, my prompt looked like this:
</p>

<pre><code><![CDATA[
PS1=$'%{\e\a%}%B%~%b %#%b '
]]></code></pre>

<p>
Eventually, I switched back to KSH, though I've kept the <code>PS1</code> bell.
In KSH, I <a href="https://github.com/wcmaier/dotfiles/blob/558c6ac52b4f4afd6dcb5723921fd12909da37e3/.kshrc#L4">use a function</a> to generate my <code>PS1</code>.
After doing some contortions to figure out what host I'm running on (<code>${PS1SESSION}</code>) and come up with a short-yet-accurate representation of the current working directory (<code>${PS1PWD}</code>), my <code>PS1</code> function spits out the following:
</p>

<pre><code><![CDATA[
echo -ne "\a${PS1SESSION}:${BOLD}${PS1PWD}${UNBOLD} ${DOLLAR}"
]]></code></pre>

<p>
With some help from xterm and tmux, the bell allows me to fire off tasks of undetermined length and switch over to something else.
When the first task finishes, the shell (via tmux and the terminal emulator) alerts me and I can switch back.
With <code>bell-action any</code> in <a href="https://github.com/wcmaier/dotfiles/blob/41e8bd32e9f0272e0b7c0de7007c41651697a99d/.tmux.conf#L3">~/.tmux.conf</a>, tmux will generate a session bell when any of the windows linked to that session ring a bell.
Since I typically run tmux with a single master session within which I <a href="https://github.com/wcmaier/dotfiles/blob/92d916e053e3d236e16b80fa52ca840d14804821/bin/attach">nest</a> many <a href="https://github.com/wcmaier/dotfiles/tree/master/.tmux">child sessions</a>, this gives me a tree two levels deep to organize tasks.
When a shell in a tmux window generates a bell, the containing session highlights the window in the status listing and the master session also highlights the containing session's window in its status.
If I'm in a different child session, I'll see the newly indicated window in my master session and can flip back if necessary.
</p>

<p>
For (u)xterm, I <a href="https://github.com/wcmaier/dotfiles/blob/464ca52dc944467835b698fb9dcf93692547ff5c/.Xresources">set</a> two resources to make better use of my shell bells.
<code>visualBell</code> causes the terminal to blink when it detects a bell; this is annoying, so I set it to <code>false</code>.
I set <code>bellIsUrgent</code> to <code>true</code> so that xterm will set the <code>Urgency</code> hint for whatever window manager is running.
Most of the time, though, I only have one terminal open and maximized to cover the full screen, so there aren't other terminals with bells for the window manager to alert me to.
</p>

</section>

<footer>
<dl>
<dt>Published</dt>
<dd><time pubdate="pubdate" datetime="2011-03-14T08:00-05:00">March 14, 2011</time></dd>
</dl>
<p><a href="../../copyright">Copyright</a> 2010–.</p>
</footer>

</article>
</body>
</html>
